I've written before about educational
buzzwords and there's a real liability
with their use one is that educational
theorists enamored with neologisms can
tend to co-opt already well-defined
concepts redefine them and subject them
to a certain species of what could be
called educational lock in locking is
where unintentionally a design feature
has some negative effect upon future
potentials for growth the polymath
philosopher scientist and technologist
Jaron Lanier uses the example of the
london underground train system which
lacks air conditioning built at a time
when air conditioning wasn't possible on
trains now that it is possible the tubes
simply aren't large enough for the
exhaust required to accommodate air
conditioning systems so for now at least
passengers are locked in to a hot and
uncomfortable system most months of the
year in education sometimes we can
define into being terminology that
defines future directions in teaching
and this constrains options for what
might be learned and how for example
does calling certain activities critical
and creative thinking techniques lock in
how we might think clearly about these
ideas I'm concerned we're headed down
the wrong track and before we get too
far I want to pull the brakes and
consider whether metaphorically speaking
we might not want to widen the tunnel to
accommodate some better ideas about what
these terms mean critical and creative
thinking are ways to generate knowledge
and how knowledge is generated is the
domain of a particular area of
philosophy called epistemology
epistemology is one of the most
interesting and yet least well
understood subjects within philosophy
people who know a little about
philosophy or perhaps have very little
interest in it can be dismissive of the
whole project at times because they
think it is largely concerned with moral
philosophy or ethics or metaphysics and
ontology that's a concern about what
really exists and what
ultimately there is to know and that
everything within philosophy is little
more than some mere matter of opinion
but this is false for example the
central question within epistemology of
how we can come to have reliable
knowledge of the world is no mere matter
of opinion it makes objective difference
to how well we can make progress as to
what this answer is and this is what
epistemology really is it's literally
the theory of knowledge as its defined
an analytical philosophy and in this
area of philosophy there really is a
best theory that we should strive to
understand now not all of what is called
philosophy or marches under that banner
is interesting or even useful but much
is worth preserving and trying to learn
more about not least of which is
epistemology as it's relevant to
learning the subject of this present
peace epistemology as it's currently
best understood can help us to have an
optimistic view of humanity and life and
if you want a well-rounded idea of
philosophy you should probably also
include some philosophy of science if
you want to understand how scientific
knowledge in particular grows now
returning to our definition of
epistemology as the theory of knowledge
we can rephrase it without any loss of
meaning whatever to epistemology is the
explanation of the growth of knowledge
and this growth of knowledge can happen
as a civilization or it can happen as a
society or a small community or it can
even happen inside the single mind of a
learner the remarkable thing is that the
processes it turns out are the same now
let me explain there are two absolutely
crucial aspects to the growth of
knowledge creativity and criticism now
in educational circles the terms
critical and creative thinking have
migrated away from how they have largely
and precisely being used in the more
rarefied spheres where they have been
genuine domains of study
controversy in progress over the decades
especially within epistemology the terms
now are synonymous not with thinking as
such but rather with certain teaching
strategies that are more or less
fashionable amongst some educators and
some educational theorists I wish to
quickly admit that it's more or less
well-known that there's a world of
difference between a teaching strategy
and a learning strategy it is safe to
say that almost all strategies used by
teachers to teach students are the
former not the latter teaching
strategies ways of organizing school
work or ideas on paper why is it having
students respond to questions or
complete tasks whether they stand up and
move around a class sit down and do the
work quietly speak or not speak draw
pictures or write words indeed the very
behaviors typically promoted by
theorists and cultivated in classes by
teachers these are teaching strategies
almost everything ever covered in any
professional development course or a
university level teacher training course
completed by teachers and ostensibly
labeled a learning strategy is a
teaching strategy learning strategies
are very difficult to combine and that
is because learning happens best in a
free environment where coercion is just
not part of the picture and someone else
isn't choosing for you how best to learn
so it happens to be the case that one
can deploy every teaching strategy in
the countless teaching handbooks and
websites and seminars ever deployed and
learning can still be elusive why
because simply naming something say nine
hats for better thinking does not mean
it is genuinely about thinking labeling
something does not make it so thinking
is always a creative process constrained
by careful criticism what happens in the
mind of an individual learner is that
they guess or conjecture what might be
true what might work and then they
criticize this idea if the idea survives
our criticism
and they regard themselves as having
learnt it they conditionally regarded as
true however educational theorists love
near llege isms educational theorists
think that if they come up with Aniela
jizzum they have actually invented a new
idea typically what they have done is
either just label some common sense or
some older idea or adapted some
pre-existing set of ideas for the
purpose of naming it a teaching strategy
or a learning strategy and the theorists
often gives these a name that may sound
very scientific sometimes it can be fun
for example you might want to encourage
students to become a physics brain an
idea I came up with some years ago think
of something about a given topic that be
bugs you then also something that you
can r reflect on and a another idea
related to the one under study find
something interesting and something n-
you can make up your own acronym there
are many such things now on my own our
reflection I realized this game far from
organizing thoughts can tend to restrict
them what we really needed was true
criticism and creativity if that's what
we're interested in trying to learn so
how should it work critical and creative
thinking begins with a criticism you
should criticize what don't you
understand what is wrong get to the
heart of it then create can you improve
on this can you think of a new ID
superior to the one that you've
criticized if you can then that new idea
is the one that you should regard as
being true if you can and there is an
idea that you don't have a criticism of
then you should regard that one is true
and so in learning now I've tended to
avoid ways of organizing thoughts
because mine's just don't work that way
and nor should they now there are
exceptions to this for example if your
entire objective
is that you want to pass an exam then
perhaps yes if that's your goal passing
exams all those many mnemonics and
tricks and techniques they can seem to
work for some but we must be careful to
separate passing exams is not the same
as critical and creative thinking
passing exams is about adhering as
closely as possible to someone else's
ideas of what the correct way to think
is it's anti critical it is not very
good objecting to questions in an exam
or you're having one it's no good taking
issue with the premise of a question
some people might the best students
might take a risk most will not why not
well why should they examinations an
assessment tasks and education are
generally antithetical to anything but
adhering to or rising to meet to find
outcomes things already thought through
it is thus not only anti critical its
anti creativity exams and assessment
tasks are not about new ideas they're
about showing that you have grasped old
ideas the ideas that have been taught
see the problem so let us right now
return to basics let us consider what is
meant by critical and creative thinking
and see if these can help us learn first
true critical and creative thinking of
the very means by which we learn indeed
they are the only means they are the
whole story but do we understand the
whole story no do we understand anything
yes of course quite a bit we have some
very good ideas some very true ideas we
understand a lot about critical thinking
but not quite so much about creative
thinking so in part 2 i'm going to
explain a little bit about what we know
about critical thinking
you